# Why Code? 
# A Case Study in Greenhorn Digital Humanities
#### By Shannon Bruffett and Charles B. Harris
How can a historian, curator, or public historian create an interactive visualization without writing a single line of code?  Although the ability to write code is a masterful technique when it comes to visualizations, is it necessary to create a powerful presentation?


Our project argues that the answer is definitively no, which we will demonstrate through a discussion of programs that do not require the ability to write code. These programs still require training, but most of these applications can be taught via tutorial, YouTube video instruction or just simply following the step-by-step instructions provided by the manufacturer as you would on the Shutterfly or SmartDraw platforms for quick design solutions.  Historians without coding experience have not always had good options for visualization outside PowerPoint, Flash, and Quark Pagemaker; many times those programs could not utilize interactive maps, present multimedia (photos, videos, animations, etc.) in a compelling way, or construct tables and charts. This project will prove that the professional historian can overcome a lack of coding experience and still produce quality digital scholarship by using programs like the ArcGIS Story Map Tour, Tableaux, and Curate – three very user-friendly, yet highly effective interactive visualization tools. The project discussed in this paper focused specifically on the ArcGIS Story Map Tour application and three separate projects that showcase the ease, the scope and the sophistication of this powerful visualization.


The Story Map Tour online application was created by the ESRI Corporation as an interactive program to transform the complicated maps generated by ArcGIS into user-friendly visualizations that can be accessed by anyone with basic internet skills. Computer Cartography, the making of digital maps, is still a very complex operation and even programs like ArcGIS, a geographic information systems tool, require years of training and certification to run the program professionally. Story Map takes the information contained in an ArcGIS map – the basemap and layers of data – and turns it into an “attractive, easy-to-use web apps that help you present geographic information with compelling photographic and video story elements.” (“ArcGIS Instruction Manual,” ESRI Corporation, 3).


Although Story Map’s main function is the combination of digital maps with layers of information to present a story, the software designers created a powerful presentation tool that can integrate different multimedia sources in a scroll-down and right-scroll format. Layers are data, design elements, text, multimedia, etc. laid over a basemap so that all layers and the map can be seen integrated into one design. The user can create PowerPoint-style text-based presentations that can utilize video, audio, photos, charts, graphs, etc.The Story Map template reconfigures itself based on the platform that accesses it allowing for use on computers, tablets and smart phones without sacrificing its interactive capabilities. Below is documentation of three projects and links to the Story Map presentations; this is our attempt to show the value of this program that can help the coding-challenged historian venture into the intimidating world of Digital Humanities. The first project was our initial exposure to Story Map in the form of a large project that utilized a class of undergraduates of data collection, the second project was our first application of the program to one of our subject matter areas (American Victory Museum) and our third project demonstrated the use of a detailed .csv file to make a quick visualization.

### Viking Town Project, ArcGIS Story Map

[Viking History Project](http://usflibrary.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=2257c2cb8f144bf08cdcae2dde04c8c4)

This case study began as a digital humanities project in an undergraduate Viking History course before it became our final DH project for Hacking History. Dr. Jennifer Dukes-Knight and Jonathan Sanchez in USF Special Collections designed a Story Map project centered on Viking towns from ninth and tenth centuries that were spread throughout Scandinavia, Norway, the English Isles, France, Germany and western Russia. As a Graduate Assistant in the USF History Department, Charles Harris was tasked with assisting on the Viking Town Project with the collection of student-sourced data, proof reading and input of date, and organizing those files for the final design by Mr. Sanchez. Not only was data management a part of the Story Map training, but Mr. Sanchez also provided a beginner-level series of sessions that allowed Mr. Harris to learn how to add photos, videos and text to existing layers and how to add slides or “tour points” to existing Story Map projects. 

The forty-four undergraduate students in Dr. Dukes-Knight’s Viking History course were divided into teams of two with one student responsible for the history of the Viking town they chose and the other student researching the archaeological record. After submitting their work into Canvas for grading, the students were given instructions to input each section of their paper into a data base (Brief Description, History, Archaeology, Sources, Photo Citations and Links); this information was easily turned into .csv files which were imported directly into the Story Map program. After my remediation of the data, photo links, and hyperlinks, Mr. Sanchez took over a majority of the design work and Mr. Harris assisted with the addition of layers, which were also imported directly into the slides of the individual towns. 

The result was a professional-designed and esthetically-pleasing website that allows the public to take a tour of fifteen Viking Towns through the scholarship of forty-four different students, including historiography and archaeological studies of experts worldwide. This is an extremely powerful methodology of digital humanities even in the hands of undergraduate students. These students had an opportunity to present their work to the class and the Story Map Tour app worked perfectly as a presentation platform that was vastly superior to PowerPoint. Instead of twenty-two different PowerPoint presentations with twenty-two different styles, Story Map provided uniformity for all the presentations and the interactive features allowed students to show their peers maps, photos, videos and even 3D animations of archaeological sites for further detail. Story Map also converts to an app when accessed by a smart phone allowing other students or the instructor to follow along or explore on their own.

The success of this project inspired us to start using Story Map as a practical application for those who are not adept at coding, and each of us turned to our chosen field of study as to create our own Story Map presentation. We both began collecting the data, photos, and websites needed to make our own Story Map.

### American Victory Museum, Maiden Voyage 1945-46 (Harris)

[American Victory Museum Project](http://arcg.is/2fGlcJd)

Mr. Harris, a docent, curator, and internship coordinator at the American Victory Museum in Tampa, FL., used the Story Map platform in an attempt to fill an education need for the museum, which is trying to improve its online presence. The American Victory Museum is actually a Victory-class cargo ship, SS American Victory, and it is only one of four WWII-era ships still functioning under her own power. She is also listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The project focuses on the maiden voyage of the SS American Victory, which took the 455-foot ship all the way around the world in its only World War II deployment in 1945-1946 with nineteen stops and 28,765 nautical miles traveled. 

The challenge with this project was the number of voyage stops (19) and the distances traveled (San Pedro, CA, to the Philippines, and eventually to New York Harbor). Although the map, photos used, and the text printed tells a story, this website needs more help not only with content, but with design. The source of the location and date of each stop are from the museum archives/ship’s records that give a complete list of each port of call, the dates involved, and sometimes cargo manifests. Although this program does not have that level of sophistication, it is our intention to return to this project after further instruction (and some document scanning in Special Collections) and add original documents for examination by the general public. The Story Map platform allows the Public Historian to create a way to educate a mass audience and they have an unimpeded path back to the program to add information and improve accuracy. The Maiden Voyage program can be expanded to one slide per port of call and we are also hoping to use this application to document all twenty-eight voyages of the ship - all 310,500 nautical miles - through the Korean War, the Marshall Plan, the Vietnam War, and its journey to Tampa as a museum ship.

### Urban History, a Avenue Project 1924-1931 (Bruffett)

[Central Avenue, Tampa Project](http://arcg.is/2fJJdgH)

Shannon Bruffett, who is exploring the Urban History of Tampa as part of his graduate studies, focused his Story Map application on the Central Avenue Project 1924-1931; this became a case study to measure the difficulty of the project, the time-to-completion, and to examine the quality of the visualization. The project is focused on Central Avenue in Tampa, FL. from 1924-1931 and it examines the African American-owned business district along Central, which was cleared out for the construction of I-275 and the off- and on-ramps to the interstate. In order to accomplish our goal, we compiled data via primary sources such as city directories, urban renewal project studies, census data, and another digital humanities project that contributed to our visualization. This Story Map Tour project is based on a website by Robinson High School student Mary Elizabeth Johnson and it was created to showcase this largely-unknown history of Tampa during the Great Depression; we made sure to create a hyperlink at the top right side of the page to take you to more information. Our goal was to take this information and turn it into something easily-accessed from a smart phone.

The first step was collecting the relevant information from the website that would provide names, addresses, some basic information and photos from Central Avenue. All of this information was transferred to an Excel spreadsheet and this .csv file was imported into the Central Avenue Story Map Project. Within seconds, all eight locations that were entered into the .csv file were set into our map and all the photos and descriptions were displayed … the map was ready for use immediately. Mr. Bruffett went back into the project and edited some of the descriptions, swapped out a few photos, and added some color and a USF logo to make it look as professional as possible in as little time as possible. 

The result is a professionally-design Story Map Tour that may not have the intricacy of the Viking Project or the scope of the American Victory Museum Project, but this is an example of Story Map’s capability to construct a viable piece of digital scholarship that can be turned into a walking tour within minutes of articulating the data into an Excel spreadsheet. After Mr. Bruffett organized the data, the project was ready to go to design. This project was more complete and esthetically-pleasing than the American Victory Project done in a fraction of the time. The Central Avenue virtual tour turned out better than expected and Mr. Bruffett intends on using this as the preamble to a project that includes The Scrub, the Port of Tampa and Ybor City as they existed at various points in Tampa’s urban history. All of which can appear on the same Story Map to tell the story of the African American experience in Tampa during the Roaring Twenties and the Great Depression.

### Final Thoughts

The Viking Town Project taught us the power of Story Maps as methodology. The training provided by Jonathan Sanchez in USF Special Collections and online through the ArcGIS training tutorials and YouTube videos pushed us to see the possibilities of this program as a final project for Hacking History. The American Victory Project was created from a need at the American Victory Museum in Tampa for an interactive program to be utilized on their website for education purposes. Because of the adaptability and ease-of-use of Story Map, public historians can add onto their presentations to build on their work making for a more-dynamic and compelling narrative for audiences – both public and academic. This project built our skills and use of .csv files in order to complete our final project, The Tampa Urban History – Central Avenue Project. Two digital humanities amateurs utilized skills learned inside (.csv file use and implementation) and outside the classroom (Story Map), collected historical data into a useable format, and, within thirty minutes, produced a professionally-designed virtual tour that shows some of the African American-owned businesses on Central Avenue in Tampa 1924-1931. Other information on the site and links to the source websites tell a complete story of early twentieth century Urban History in downtown Tampa accessible on your smart phone in class.

#### Work Flow

1.	Historical Issue/ Project, Research, Scholarship production  need for visualization.
2.	Concept creation and data collection
A.	Photos: Make sure to save photo file that begins with http and ends with .jpg or .png.
B.	Video: Save the embedding code and the link to the sourced website (i.e. YouTube).
C.	GPS coordinates: Necessary for point locations on your map.
D.	Charts and Graphs: Save .jpg or .png versions of charts and graphs.
E.	Web links: Save all links and keep hyperlinks to transfer to StoryMaps text.
F.	Text: Edit down scholarship to appropriate word count based project parameters.
-	Create descriptions for your photos that include citations.
G.	Sources: Make a bibliography, Photo credit page, and list of web links.
3.	Accessing online programs: Creating arcgis.com account, Photo and video sharing.
A.	To get started on training or a project, make a free arcgis.com account.
-	You will be able to access arcgis.com, esri.com, and storymaps.arcgis.com.
B.	Make sure to save photos/videos in a photo sharing site: FaceBook, Flickr, YouTube.
-	You will need a sharing site in case the photos you select are taken off their original websites and are protected on your sharing site. Photo storage through arcgis.com is not available on free accounts.
4.	The user can take two paths: create map in ArcGIS or create project in Story Map.
A.	ArcGIS path requires more savvy GIS skills.
-	.csv files can be imported to place tour points on a map layer on a platform.
-	Additional layers can be added manually.
-	Can create Story Map from the ArcGIS map
B.	Story Map path eliminates the ArcGIS map step taking the user directly to app.
-	Quick start up into design software.
-	ArcGIS map step not necessary for non-geographical visualizations.
-	.csv files can be imported to place tour points on a map layer on a platform.
-	Additional layers can be added manually.
5.	Basic Visualization in Story Map program.
A.	Select a format (six different templates are available and a seventh custom option).
B.	Import photo sharing site information or .csv file from your computer.
C.	For a map-based presentation, .csv file fills in tour point locations, descriptions and basic photo presentations. Additional information can be added in the Builder Mode.
D.	For non-map-based presentations, a base layer is created from one of your photos along with banner titles, photo descriptions and text information. From there, layers can be added that include multimedia stored on your photo sharing sites or photos and videos that are available directly from the web.
-	ArcGIS suggests to use your own sharing sites so your photo or video is still available to your project should the website link ever get deleted.
-	The instructions for creating layers and adding them to projects are far too long of a process for this level of Workflow. Please consult the ArcGIS online instruction book for a more-detailed look.
E.	After the import, all of your tour points should be visible and all fields, including titles and description text boxes, can be edited. There are also buttons to Add, Import and Organize the different slides and multimedia sources to build on the basic import.
-	Story Map allows you to change the template after the import for a different view of the virtual tour.
F.	Click on the Share button to make the project accessible to the public, which will create a link that will take your audience to a fully-operation digital humanities tool.
