[Data Scientist](roles/data_scientist.md): Concentrates on scraping, cleaning, and transforming the data upon which digital projects depend. This may involve lightweight tools as well as more intensive techniques involving coding. This person does not simply 'prep' data, but has to make active decisions in interpreting data.

[Visualization Expert](roles/visualization_expert.md): Analyzes and interprets the results visually. While professionals often employ coding for visualization, in this class, the visualization expert will primarily use software packages and online tools. Beyond creating the final visuals, this expert also continually helps the group perform exploratory analysis. Visualization experts do not simply make attractive pictures, they employ different tools to help the team try to think about their 

[Digital Analyst](roles/digital_analyst.md): The digital analyst sits at the crossroads of traditional academic inquiry and  unconventional digital approaches. The analyst gives the project its critical voice. This may come in the form of discovering and analyzing existing digital work relevant to the project (a digital historiography, if you will). Most importantly, however, the digital analyst interprets the work of the project. By doing so, this person makes the work conversant with the larger scholarly debate. To absurdly oversimply, the digital analyst answers the question, "so what?"

[Digital Curator](roles/digital_curator.md): Without digital curators, there would be no field of Digital Humanities as we know it. Lacking sound data, sound analysis is impossible. Digital curators might optically scan diaries, create interactive maps, or chart social relationships. Digital curators create new data from existing historical evidence, or new data by blending existing information. Most importantly, they ensure that the information that the project produces is correct, and done in a manner that is sensitive to the evidence.

[Project Manager](roles/project_manager.md): Digital projects involve lots of data, complex workflows, and the chaos of coordinating human cooperation! Not unlike a show runner in the entertainment industry, the project manager provides the vision for the project as a whole. In order to carry this out, the project manager will learn industry-standard tools like git to simplify files and workflows.