# Digital Analysis Proposal

## The Problem

The interest of this proposal is the study of US veterans that are buried or memorialized overseas, specifically those sites run by the American Battle Monuments Commission (ABMC). The ABMC is a federal agency that maintains 52 sites on foreign soil, with most American war dead serving in World War I, World War II, the Korean War, or the Vietnam War. With these cemeteries and memorials being overseas, the likelihood that they will be visited or seen compared to those in the US are slim at most. This proposal is to highlight the need for visuals in the scholarship of foreign US sites, and the impact specific global visualizations can have not only to present scholarship, but to be scholarship. The impact or stakes of this project can be seen in two major discussions: fulfilling a cemetery or memorial’s purpose and the education of the current/future generations.

When thinking of what a cemetery or memorial’s purpose is, the average thought is that it is for the dead. After all, the only ones to have their names placed in these sites are the deceased. In a quote by Dr. David Lowenthal that Dr. Lita Tzortzopoulou-Gregory examines, he states, “Cemeteries matter less as repositories for the dead than as fields of remembrance for the living; the unmarked grave goes unseen” (Tzortzopoulou-Gregory 285). A grave or memorial is not for the dead themselves, but for the living left behind, allowing the living to remember and commemorate those that have been lost. Though one purpose of US cemeteries and memorials on foreign soil that will be explored later is foreign affairs, another is this base level of being remembered by one’s own country. ABMC sites that are not seen by the US public in themselves become “unmarked graves”, going unseen. Though cliché, the phrase “out of sight, out of mind” could be the case when it comes to the US’ foreign cemeteries/memorials if digital methods are not taken.

In order to remember or commemorate something, you must known about it first, and that is where education comes in. In an article studying the impact of visuals, Dr. David Johnson and Dr. Nicole Gilbertson examine this new generation of 1990’s students, “who are arguably more greatly affected by visual rather than textual stimuli in modern culture” (Johnson and Gilbertson 564). A common thought in students, with my siblings being no different, is that history is the worst subject because it’s boring. The reason it is considered boring is that the same teaching methods that have been in place forever, which are to memorize and read text. Though those activities are crucial to studying history, adding visual approaches like interactive maps, bar graphs, and GPS can spark interest in younger audiences. If students are expected to have a greater interest, respect, or understanding of US soldiers who fought for their country, attempts to find out how to interest those students need to be made, with visuals being the step in the right direction. 

Though there are modern technological works about ABMC sites that have some visualizations, they are too limited. This limitation is that either the work/data is too general but on large scale i.e. global, or very specific but on a small-scale i.e. one or two sites. The overall proposal is to prove that it is possible to combine these two limitations, by using ABMC’s online data to create visualizations that show specific data on a global scale.

## Scholarship

Though reports were frequent, the study of cemeteries and memorials is a more recent subject of interest, with the first America book on war memorials being written by James M. Mayo, a member of the school of architecture, in 1988 (Mayo 5). In his smaller article War Memorials as Political Memory, which released months before his book, Mayo describes memorials as places of utility, with each site’s utility and sacredness varying from high to low. Examples of this are hospitals compared to shrines, with memorial hospitals labeled as high utility and low sacredness, while memorial shrines are labeled as low utility and high sacredness. Memorial hospitals accommodate a social productiveness that shrines do not, but the sacredness of shrines provides a different service, a service of remembrance and commemoration (Mayo 63). In other words, though each memorial has a different use, they are all used for something, becoming utilities. Mayo introduced American historians to a way of studying memorials on less of an emotional level, and more of an intellectual one.

With the progress of scholarship from Mayo’s studying becoming less about the school/hospital memorials and transitioning more toward the classic graves/monuments, the study of utility has waned. Scholarship in the field of cemeteries and memorials can now best be described as the study of visuals and their effect on the surrounding area, for what are these sites if not structures to be seen? This scholarship of cemetery/memorial visuals can be put into two general categories:
 
1. Studying how cemeteries and memorials reflect the culture of a nation/state
2. Studying how cemeteries and memorials reflect the foreign policies of external powers

### Culture Through Visuals
The scholarship around cemeteries and memorials has begun to use both visuals and the absence of visuals in order to examine the culture of countries on a different level that has been rarely visited. With culture, all facets of a nation are studied, whether through its food, government, or traditions. Dr. Lita Tzortzopoulou-Gregory and Dr. Kenneth Inglis use cemeteries and memorials as you would any other subject, to study a nation’s culture.
In Dr. Tzortzopoulou-Gregory’s article Remembering and Forgetting: The Relationship Between Memory and the Abandonment of Graves in Nineteenth- and Twentieth-Century Greek Cemeteries, she examines Modern Greek cemeteries and the concept of neglect vs. commemoration. In her studies, Dr. Tzortzopoulou-Gregory examines the communities around these graves through the analysis of a sort of “cemetery culture”. An example of this is how one grave would have an immaculate upkeep, while the one next would be overgrown and falling apart. Dr. Tzortzopoulou-Gregory was able to view a cultural phenomenon of responsibility that was expected for those in one’s immediate family, but not carried over to one’s community (Tzortzopoulou-Gregory 289). By studying the physical condition of graves, like the lack of upkeep, Dr. Tzortzopoulou-Gregory was able to study a community through the cemetery alone.

Scholars have viewed different cultures not only through cemeteries but also through war memorials, as echoed by Dr. Inglis in War Memorials: Ten Questions For Historians article, where, in 1992, he addressed the newer field of war memorial study.  Whilst answering a variety of questions about the origin of the study, Dr. Inglis explains the differences between countries by grave inscriptions, rate of soldiers buried on foreign soil, amount of honors given to soldiers, etc (Inglis 8). An example he uses in his own research is the lack of named fallen soldiers on French memorials compared to British and New Zealand memorials from World War I. A cultural synergy between these three nations was the feeling that draftees should not be praised for “doing their civic duty”, with volunteers being the ones who deserved praise. With the majority of the French army being draftees and British/New Zealand army not drafting until midway through the war, British/New Zealand soldiers would have their names recorded more frequently than if they were French (Inglis 10). Dr. Inglis was able observe this cultural phenomenon that took place between several countries through the study of World War I memorials, allowing his historical knowledge to aid his cultural study.

### Foreign Policy Through Visuals
With one side of the scholarship examining what and how cemeteries/memorials can tell us about the surrounding culture, another side is studying what these sites on foreign soil can tell us about the creator’s foreign policy; in other words, what was the site supposed to portray to its host? Three authors that target this question are Dr. David A. Johnson, Dr. Nicole F. Gilbertson, and Dr. Ron Robin.

Dr. Johnson and Dr. Gilbertson studied the All Indian War Memorial (later renamed the India Gate), focusing on its location and date of construction. On record, the All Indian War Memorial commemorates the sacrifice of Indian soldiers in World War I and the Afghan Wars, speaking to the “unbreakable bond” between the British and India people (Johnson and Gilbertson 579). With the date of construction being at the height of the anti-colonial mindset in India and it being built in central New Delhi (India’s capital), Dr. Johnson and Dr. Gilbertson’s are able to add another angle to the study of this famous memorial (Johnson and Gilbertson 577-578). These two factors of the All Indian War Memorial’s construction display a different history than is seen at “face value”, a history where Britain tries to maintain their imperial power over India by displaying good will through an always-visible commemoration of their deceased.

The most relevant scholarship to this “Digital Analysis Proposal” concerning the data of the ABMC is a work by Dr. Ron Robin: “A Foothold in Europe”: The Aesthetics and Politics of American War Cemeteries in Western Europe. In this work, Dr. Robin compares American World War I cemeteries and memorials to those from World War II, studying how these sites can show the progression of the United State’s identity on a foreign or global stage. The architecture and iconography of World War I sites echo a familiar Greek-style to display the United States’ European history and values, in addition to examples of Americans and French side by side, an example being the Chateau-Thierry Memorial; these architectural liberties introduce the US as an equal partner to the European countries. The architecture and iconography of World War II sites shies away from the Euro-centric features of World War I sites, introducing a new individualistic American style, exchanging the American and French side by side with American and American. This transition of architecture not only announced a visual change, but also a political one, with America switching from a partner to a leader (Robin 69-71). Dr. Robin’s study of the architectural and visual transition of American war memorials in Europe allows a historian to see the United States’ global presence evolve from partner to leader, putting emphasis on the importance of cemetery and memorial scholarship.

###Technology In Scholarship
With technology integrating itself into every type of scholarship, the study of memorials and cemeteries is no different. Though Ron Robin’s studies are most relevant scholarship wise, his study does not reflect the digital methods needed, which is where Dr. Tzortzopoulou-Gregory ‘s study thrives. In Dr. Tzortzopoulou-Gregory ‘s study, her team manually created a dataset from 2,295 graves, with the individual features. Her team began uploading this dataset into an electronic database and linking it to a form of GIS or geographic information system (Tzortzopoulou-Gregory 288). With the a database linked to a GIS platform, full of data, Dr. Tzortzopoulou-Gregory was able to create maps, in addition to bar and line graphs, using these visuals to support her theories concerning grave upkeep (Tzortzopoulou-Gregory 291-292).
The idea to electronically map cemeteries or memorials seems to be the prime digital method used, whether for academic or utility use. Though less of an academic study and more of a call to action, Dr. Johan Liebens calls for the academic modernization of cemetery studies through technological integration in his article Map and Database Construction for an Historic Cemetery: Methods and Applications. Dr. Liebens explains how his project created a fully interactive virtual map or virtual tour of the St. Michael’s Cemetery in Florida step by step. Some of the steps vary, from the use of GIS and EDM devices to the use of tables and line graphs (Liebens 58-65) In the end, the virtual tour and complete database of St. Michael’s Cemetery shows how various digital methods can look as a final product.

##Work Flow

###Scrapping Data

The first step of my project was to scrape the data off of the ABMC’s burial database, which had each soldier’s name, rank, service number, unit, state of entry, date of death, branch, status (MIA or Buried at Sea), war, awards, cemetery/memorial, etc. To do this, I decided to try two different methods to see what data I was given.

One method was using the Download button at the bottom of ABMC’s search page, allowing the download of all data except the status category. This download option took approximately 2 hours to download the information of 218,002 individuals, with all information except status in a neat Excel Spreadsheet. I also noticed that ABMC’s download option put all of a soldier’s awards together, not separated by the award’s name or anything. Being curious about what the awards could tell me, I realized the only way to study them would be to duplicate each soldier for each award; for example, if a soldier had 3 different awards, I would create 3 duplicates of the soldier, all with the same information except with each of the 3 duplicates gaining a different reward.

To do this, I would try my second data scraping tool, Web Scraper or webscraper.io. Through Google Chrome, I was able use Web Scraper to lift the data off of each individual page, fulfilling the “awards” issue I had. That is where I ran into a problem, not because of my programming, but with time. In approximately 9 hours of constant scrapping, Web Scraper had gotten to soldiers with the last name starting in W when the scraping had started at Z. My time and computer were not worth continuing the scrape, so I decided to just use the data from the ABMC Download option.

### Cleaning Data/OpenRefine

Saving the data as a CSV in Excel with two additional manually put it columns (country and region), I transitioned to the second program OpenRefine, which is a program that cleans data and allows you transform the data’s format. My plan was to pair each cemetery with the country and region of where it was located to create a map using the visualization program Tableau, with OpenRefine allowing me to do this fast and at a massive scale. After doing a trial run with a small data set of 117 soldiers, the program worked well, prompting me to upload my large 218,002-soldier data set. This large data set became a problem with OpenRefine, citing that the data was using 100% of the memory usage. The data would enter OpenRefine but would become unresponsive, causing me to find a different way to edit the data.

###Visualization

Luckily, I knew another way to pair country and location of the cemeteries in my dataset, through the visualization machine Tableau. I manually created a separate Excel spreadsheet that had all of the cemeteries in my dataset with the country they were in, in addition to the longitude and latitude of the sites, obtained through the site GeoHack. Once in Tableau, I was able to cross both my large data set and this smaller one together to create a map with dots on the exact location of the cemeteries/memorials.
With this data in Tableau, I was able to experiment with my dataset in a user-friendly environment, not only for creating visuals but also to analyze it through a visual lens. Though many problems arose, though trial and error, I was able to use different programs to create visuals with a massive data set.

##Initial Impressions

Using the data that I was able to take from ABMC’s database and putting it through the visualization generator that is Tableau, interesting results began to emerge.

!(Branches Seperated By War)(files/bar.png)

This bar graph takes the number of soldiers by branch and separates them by war. Two things stand out about this graph at a quick glance.

1. A size of US Navy numbers in the Korean War and Vietnam War
2. A difference in the amount of soldiers that are buried/memorialized in WWI/WWII compared to the Korea War/Vietnam War.

When looking at the size of the US Navy on this graph, 3 out of the 4 wars either having fewer than 600 soldiers. With the low numbers of World War I being understandable because of the US’ late entry into the war, Korea and Vietnam’s numbers are interesting. My hypothesis is that these numbers speak to the superiority of the US Navy and North Korea/Viet Cong lacking a level of naval threat. The US’ Navy had been evolving since World War I and North Korea/Viet Cong did not have the funds or powerful allies to be able to develop a sizeable Navy. This hypothesis and data combine for a statement that the US Navy post-World War 2 was one of the safest positions in the military.
The lack of US Navy numbers is not the only thing the Korean War and Vietnam War suffer from, but the lack of numbers at all. This lack of numbers could be attributed to US’ foreign policy after World War II, which stated that all recoverable remains were to be returned to the US from then on. This could be the case if the ABMC didn’t have memorials in foreign countries that contribute to the data but they did, with the Cambridge American Cemetery’s Tablets of the Missing memorial being an example. I think this lack of numbers, correlating with the lack of cemeteries/memorials in Korea and Vietnam, reflect the US’ position as global entity. Agreeing with Ron Robin in his assessment of the US’ sites on foreign soil, the US introduced it’s self as a leading global power through its World War II architecture. With the US already having established its new position on a global stage through World War II sites, there would be no more political need to have memorials or cemeteries abroad.

!(Death Seperated By Day, Month, Year)(files/area.png)

!(The Largest Circle is 10/24/1994)(files/circle.png)

These visuals focus on the date of death of the soldiers in the ABMC’s database, with the circle graph showing the most “popular” date of death, and the area graph showing the most prominent day, month, and year of death. More interesting than enlightening, the area graph provides information like October being the most dangerous month and the obvious year of death spikes around World War I and World War II. The circle graph not only is an interesting/complex looking visual, but it also provides information. The biggest circle on the graph turned out to be October 24, 1944; with it being no coincidence that the month and year are both the highest peaks in their categories within the area graph. Not only did the date match the data on the area graph, it also matched the date of maybe the largest navel battle of World War II, the Battle of Leyte Gulf, a battle near the Philippines, correlating with ABMC’s Manila American Cemetery. Being able to use dates from ABMC’s database not only allows the calculation of data, like the deadliest month, but also the ability to use visualization to commemorate major losses in a new visual way.

!(Entry vs Burial/Memorial)(files/statevs.png)

!(GPS Location of Cemeteries/Memorials)(files/gps.png)

These filled map graphs demonstrate a collaborative story, with one showing where in the US that soldiers entered the military from and the other showing where they were buried or memorialized. Much could be done with this data, but when combining it with the dot map that lists the Corozal American Cemetery in Panama as a World War I site, my interest was peaked. The Panama Canal was finished in 1914 by the US and was meant mostly for trade, with its military use/purpose being debatable. The argument behind the canal having no real military use focuses on how small it is, not allowing large military vessels to use it. Combining common historical knowledge and the data from my visualizations, I wish to argue that the Panama Canal was built for military reasons just as much as for trade/commercial.

1. In the dot graph, the Corozal American Cemetery is labeled as a World War I site by a government appointed organization, the ABMC.
2. Looking at the filled graph of the US, one can see the importance of the West Coast when it comes to soldiers, with approximately 12 thousand coming from California alone. To transport them during World War I to Western Europe would have a trek. To compensate, smaller sea vessel transports could be used by the military to pass through the canal. 
3. The US president in charge at the time was Theodore Roosevelt, a military-minded president
4. The Panama Canal was officially opened in 1914, opening the same year as the start of World War I

These visualizations and hypothesizes only scratch the surface to what digital methods can achieve. The way to continue and improve upon this data is to try and limit the problems with it. The data that I have used is only from 27 of 52 ABMC sites, limiting the scholarship that can be done. By finding a complete data set or by having the ABMC upload all of their data from all sites online, credible and legitimate scholarship/studies can be made. Through the data that is currently available from the ABMC’s database, I have not only shown a way to improve the scholarship of US cemeteries/memorials on foreign soil, but also a way to create an ultra-specific global visual database.

## Sources/Bibliography

- Inglis, Kenneth. 1992. “WAR MEMORIALS: TEN QUESTIONS FOR HISTORIANS.” Guerres Mondiales et Conflits Contemporains 167 (July): 5–21.
- Johnson, David, and Nicole Gilbertson. 2010. “Commemorations of Imperial Sacrifice at Home and Abroad: British Memorials of the Great War.” The History Teacher 43 (4): 563–84.
- Liebens, Johan. 2003. “Map and Database Construction for an Historic Cemetery: Methods and Applications.” Historical Archaeology 37 (4): 56–68.
- Mayo, James. 1988. “War Memorials as Political Memory.” Geographical Review 78 (1): 62–75.
- Robin, Ron. 1995. “‘A Foothold in Europe’: The Aesthetics and Politics of American War Cemeteries in Western Europe.” Journal of American Studies 29 (1): 55–72.
- Tzortzopoulou-Gregory, Lita. 2010. “Remembering and Forgetting: The Relationship Between Memory and the Abandonment of Graves in Nineteenth- and Twentieth-Century Greek Cemeteries.” International Journal of Historical Achaeology 14 (2): 285–301.


